Add clang atomic control options and attribute (#114841)
llvm/llvm-project: clang/docs/LanguageExtensions.rst

- ``fine_grained_memory`` means atomic operations may be performed on fine-grained
  memory. Prefixing with ``no_`` (i.e. ``no_fine_grained_memory``) indicates that
  atomic operations should not be performed on fine-grained memory.
- ``ignore_denormal_mode`` means that atomic operations are allowed to ignore
  correctness for denormal mode in floating-point operations, potentially improving
  performance on architectures that handle denormals inefficiently. The negated form,
  if specified as ``no_ignore_denormal_mode``, would enforce strict denormal mode
  correctness.

Without any atomic metadata, LLVM IR defaults to conservative settings for
correctness: atomic operations are assumed to use remote memory, fine-grained
memory, and enforce denormal mode correctness (i.e. the equivalent of
``remote_memory``, ``fine_grained_memory``, and ``no_ignore_denormal_mode``).

The attribute may be applied only to a compound statement and looks like:

.. code-block:: c++

   [[clang::atomic(remote_memory, fine_grained_memory, ignore_denormal_mode)]]
   {
       // Atomic instructions in this block carry extra metadata reflecting
       // these user-specified options.
   }

> You can provide one or more of these options, each optionally prefixed with

Reviewer: What is the behavior with duplicate/conflicting options? 

So:
```
[[clang::atomic(remote_memory, no_remote_memory)]]{}
```
OR:
```
[[clang::atomic(remote_memory)]][clang::atomic(no_remote_memory)]]{}
```

A sentence that says "last one wins" or "first one wins" or "are rejected" are all acceptable, just please document it.

Author: Within the same atomic attribute, duplicate and conflict values are accepted and the
last value of conflicting values wins. Multiple atomic attributes are allowed
for the same compound statement and the last atomic attribute wins.

will document these and add lit tests.

Reviewer: I'm not a HUGE fan of those rules (unless there is a good reason, I err on the side of 'diagnose conflicts' in both single and multiple attributes).  Do you have a good reason to not check?

Either way, documentation + lit tests are a good idea.

compliance (for performance reasons) or knows that certain atomic operations
will not function in a particular memory space, extra hints are needed to
tell the backend how to proceed.

A classic example is an architecture where floating-point atomic add does not
fully conform to IEEE denormal-mode handling. If the user does not mind ignoring
that aspect, they would prefer to still emit a faster hardware atomic
instruction, rather than a fallback or CAS loop. Conversely, on certain GPUs
(e.g., AMDGPU), memory accessed via PCIe may only support a subset of atomic
operations (e.g., integer add, exchange, or compare-and-swap). To ensure correct
and efficient lowering, the compiler must know whether the user wants to prevent 
the use of these instructions.

Because this is metadata for atomic instructions and can be dropped if the
backend does not support it, it does not affect correctness (the program's 
behavior remains correct if the metadata is ignored), but it can significantly
improve performance or guide code generation in the cases that matter.

The attribute may be applied only to a compound statement and looks like:

.. code-block:: c++

>    [[clang::atomic(no_remote_memory, !no_fine_grained_memory, ignore_denormal_mode)]]

Reviewer 2: One thing we may want to document is that a function body is not a compound statement, and so you cannot write something like:
```
void func() [[clang::atomic(no_remote_memory]] {
}
```
as that will attempt to apply the attribute to the *type* of `func()`. Instead, you must write:
```
void func() {
  [[clang::atomic(no_remote_memory)]] {

  }
}
```

Reviewer 2: I also wonder whether there are other scenarios we may have gotchas we want to call out. For example, if you put `[[clang::atomic]]` inside of an `operator<=>`, are there situations where it may not behave how the user expects with the generated comparison and equality operators?

Another question would be what happens with function inlining. e.g.,
```
inline void func() {
  [[clang::atomic(no_remote_memory)]] {
    // ... small amount of code
  }
}

void foo() {
  [[clang::atomic(!no_remote_memory)]] {
    func(); // Call gets inlined, but which semantics "win"?
  }
}
```

Author: The ``[[clang::atomic]]`` attribute affects only the code generation of atomic
instructions within the annotated compound statement. Clang attaches
target-specific metadata to those atomic instructions in the emitted LLVM IR
to guide backend lowering. This metadata is fixed at the clang code generation
phase and is not modified by later LLVM passes (such as function inlining).

For example, consider:

.. code-block:: cpp
  inline void func() {
    [[clang::atomic(no_remote_memory)]] {
      // Atomic instructions lowered with metadata.
    }
  }

  void foo() {
    [[clang::atomic(!no_remote_memory)]] {
      func(); // Inlined by LLVM, but the metadata from 'func()' remains unchanged.
    }
  }

Similarly, when used within an operator `<=>`, the attribute only affects the
atomic instructions inside the annotated compound statement. It does not alter
the semantics of the generated comparison or equality operators.

will update the documentation about this, also about the function body

Reviewer 2: Awesome, thank you!

compliance (for performance reasons) or knows that certain atomic operations
will not function in a particular memory space, extra hints are needed to
tell the backend how to proceed.

A classic example is an architecture where floating-point atomic add does not
fully conform to IEEE denormal-mode handling. If the user does not mind ignoring
that aspect, they would prefer to still emit a faster hardware atomic
instruction, rather than a fallback or CAS loop. Conversely, on certain GPUs
(e.g., AMDGPU), memory accessed via PCIe may only support a subset of atomic
operations (e.g., integer add, exchange, or compare-and-swap). To ensure correct
and efficient lowering, the compiler must know whether the user wants to prevent
the use of these instructions.

Because this is metadata for atomic instructions and can be dropped if the
backend does not support it, it does not affect correctness (the program's
behavior remains correct if the metadata is ignored), but it can significantly
improve performance or guide code generation in the cases that matter.

The attribute may be applied only to a compound statement and looks like:

.. code-block:: c++

>    [[clang::atomic(no_remote_memory, !no_fine_grained_memory, ignore_denormal_mode)]]

Reviewer: I very much dislike the `!` syntax.  I think this instead should just be:

`[[clang::atomic(no_remote_memory, fine_grained_memory, ignore_denormal_mode)]]`

With the inverse being:
`[[clang::atomic(remote_memory, no_fine_grained_memory, no_ignore_denormal_mode)]]`

The inverting of a `no` is not really sensible, the double-negative makes these way less useful.

Author: will use the suggested format since it is more intuitive. will document their default values (i.e. no explicit metadata) for atomic instructions in LLVM IR.

   (like 32-bit ``fadd``). This often improves performance on architectures that
   do not handle denormals efficiently.

Any unspecified option is inherited from the global defaults, which can be set
by a compiler flag (described below) or the target's built-in defaults.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Suppose we globally set: -fatomic=no_remote_memory:on,no_fine_grained_memory:off
   // (meaning we do not allow remote memory usage but do allow fine-grained memory)

   void example() {
       // Locally override the "no_remote_memory" setting to *off* for this block,
       // but turn on "no_fine_grained_memory".
       [[clang::atomic(!no_remote_memory, no_fine_grained_memory)]] {
           // This compound statement's atomic ops behave differently than outside:
           //   - no_remote_memory is disabled here
           //   - no_fine_grained_memory is enabled
           //   - ignore_denormal_mode remains unchanged from global default
           // ...
       }
   }

A new compiler option, ``-fatomic=<key>:<value>[,<key2>:<value2>...]``, can
globally override the target's defaults for these atomic-lowering options.
For instance:

.. code-block:: console

>    $ clang -fatomic=no_remote_memory:on,ignore_denormal_mode:on file.cpp

Reviewer: the on/off/true/false is not particularly useful, and doesn't compose well.  One thing the compiler needs to support is getting the same command line argument with different values multiple times. We typically decide on a 1-by-1 basis WHICH we keep, and how.  They can be additive, subtractive, or replacement.  

I presume we want 'additive' with 'last one wins' here.

Additionally, I think the `no_remote_memory`/`remote_memory` suggestion here makes the on/off/etc bit way easier, and is more consistent with what we've got for command line args already.

Author: How about `-f[no-]atomic-remote-memory`, `-f[no-]atomic-fine-grained-memory`, `-f[no-]atomic-ignore-denormal-mode`? They are composable and follow the existing conventions. They can be marshalled to language options automatically.

Reviewer: Those look fine to me.  As you are the person with the best understanding here of what they are going to do, I'll trust that they properly reflect the meaning.

    a = b[i] * c[i] + e;
  }

Extensions for controlling atomic code generation
=================================================

The ``[[clang::atomic]]`` statement attribute enables users to control how
atomic operations are lowered in LLVM IR by conveying additional metadata to
the backend. The primary goal is to allow users to specify certain options,

> like whether atomic operations may be performed on specific types of memory or

Author: will do

whether to ignore denormal mode correctness in floating-point operations,

> without affecting the correctness of code that does not rely on these behaviors.

Author: will do

In LLVM, lowering of atomic operations (e.g., ``atomicrmw``) can differ based
on the target's capabilities. Some backends support native atomic instructions
only for certain operation types or alignments, or only in specific memory
regions. Likewise, floating-point atomic instructions may or may not respect
IEEE denormal requirements. When the user is unconcerned about denormal-mode
compliance (for performance reasons) or knows that certain atomic operations
will not be performed on a particular type of memory, extra hints are needed to
tell the backend how to proceed.

A classic example is an architecture where floating-point atomic add does not
fully conform to IEEE denormal-mode handling. If the user does not mind ignoring

> that aspect, they would prefer to still emit a faster hardware atomic instruction,

Author: will do

rather than a fallback or CAS loop. Conversely, on certain GPUs (e.g., AMDGPU),
memory accessed via PCIe may only support a subset of atomic operations. To ensure
correct and efficient lowering, the compiler must know whether the user wants to

> allow atomic operations on that type of memory.

Author: will do

The allowed atomic attribute values are now ``remote_memory``, ``fine_grained_memory``,
and ``ignore_denormal_mode``, each optionally prefixed with ``no_``. The meanings
are as follows:

> - ``remote_memory`` means atomic operations may be performed on remote memory.

Reviewer 3: In addition to the suggested change, I believe this documentation can be improved by providing links (preferably for more than one platform/architecture) that explain what "remote memory" is.

> - ``remote_memory`` means atomic operations may be performed on remote memory.

Author: will do

>   Prefixing with ``no_`` (i.e. ``no_remote_memory``) indicates that atomic
>   operations should not be performed on remote memory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Prefixing with ``no_`` (i.e., ``no_remote_memory``) indicates that the
  atomic operations in the statement may be assumed to not be performed on remote
  memory.
```

> - ``fine_grained_memory`` means atomic operations may be performed on fine-grained

Author: will do

> - ``fine_grained_memory`` means atomic operations may be performed on fine-grained
>   memory. Prefixing with ``no_`` (i.e. ``no_fine_grained_memory``) indicates that
>   atomic operations should not be performed on fine-grained memory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``fine_grained_memory`` means that fine-grained memory might be used with the
  atomic operations in this statement. Prefixing with ``no_`` (i.e.,
  ``no_fine_grained_memory``) indicates that the atomic operations in
  the statement may be assumed to not be performed on fine-grained memory.
```

- ``ignore_denormal_mode`` means that atomic operations are allowed to ignore
  correctness for denormal mode in floating-point operations, potentially improving
  performance on architectures that handle denormals inefficiently. The negated form,
  if specified as ``no_ignore_denormal_mode``, would enforce strict denormal mode
  correctness.

> Within the same atomic attribute, duplicate and conflict values are accepted and the
> last value of conflicting values wins. Multiple atomic attributes are allowed
> for the same compound statement and the last atomic attribute wins.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Within the same atomic attribute, duplicate and conflicting values are accepted,
and the last of any conflicting values wins. Multiple atomic attributes are
allowed for the same compound statement, and the last atomic attribute wins.
```

Author: will do

Without any atomic metadata, LLVM IR defaults to conservative settings for

> correctness: atomic operations are assumed to use remote memory, fine-grained
> memory, and enforce denormal mode correctness (i.e. the equivalent of
> ``remote_memory``, ``fine_grained_memory``, and ``no_ignore_denormal_mode``).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
correctness: atomic operations enforce denormal mode correctness and are assumed
to potentially use remote and fine-grained memory (i.e., the equivalent of
``remote_memory``, ``fine_grained_memory``, and ``no_ignore_denormal_mode``).
```

Author: will do

The attribute may be applied only to a compound statement and looks like:

.. code-block:: c++

   [[clang::atomic(remote_memory, fine_grained_memory, ignore_denormal_mode)]]
   {
       // Atomic instructions in this block carry extra metadata reflecting
       // these user-specified options.
   }

You can provide one or more of these options, each optionally prefixed with
``no_`` to negate that option. Any unspecified option is inherited from the

> global defaults, which can be set by a compiler flag or the target's built-in defaults.

Reviewer 3: This is partially redundant with:
https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/8aab205c1497ea93d8fddd3e9bbb706b4107c3c2/clang/docs/LanguageExtensions.rst?plain=1#L5472-L5474

Please merge with the above.

Author: will do

Each option has a corresponding flag:
``-fatomic-remote-memory`` / ``-fno-atomic-remote-memory``,
``-fatomic-fine-grained-memory`` / ``-fno-atomic-fine-grained-memory``,
and ``-fatomic-ignore-denormal-mode`` / ``-fno-atomic-ignore-denormal-mode``.

Code using the ``[[clang::atomic]]`` attribute can then selectively override
the command-line defaults on a per-block basis. For instance:

.. code-block:: c++

   // Suppose the global defaults assume:
   //   remote_memory, fine_grained_memory, and no_ignore_denormal_mode
   // (for conservative correctness)

   void example() {
       // Locally override the settings: disable remote_memory and enable
       // fine_grained_memory.
       [[clang::atomic(no_remote_memory, fine_grained_memory)]]
       {
           // In this block:
           //   - Atomic operations are not performed on remote memory.
           //   - Atomic operations are performed on fine-grained memory.
           //   - The setting for denormal mode remains as the global default
           //     (typically no_ignore_denormal_mode, enforcing strict denormal mode correctness).
           // ...
       }
   }

> Function bodies are not compound statements, so this will not work:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Function bodies do not accept statement attributes, so this will not work:
```

Author: will do
